Richard Dowden, director of the U.K. Royal African Society, once pointed out that China is more than ready to deal with African countries that are ruled by dictatorship. That’s because the communist regime likes its own kind.
Chinese entrepreneur researcher He Yifan, in a blog, cited the branch leader of an overseas construction company saying that in Nigeria corruption is done openly. When officials budget for projects, they include bribes to themselves as part of the cost. This is exactly what Chinese corrupt officials do.
African dictators driven by self-interest will not terminate the “resource diplomacy” with China because they have gained huge benefits from it.
Chinese aid to Africa—provided by various levels of government organizations, including the Ministry of Commerce and other ministries and provincial-level bureaus—for example, is extremely lacking in transparency.
High-ranking officials also have flexible quotas when they visit abroad. So the total aid amount is very hard to determine. This has covered up the corruption on both ends.
But more and more Africans are becoming more averse to the “savior from the east.” They complain about Chinese firms’ lack of consideration for the local ecology. Mining and lumbering seriously damage the ecology.
In addition, Chinese firms’ disregard for workers’ safety has caused frequent accidents and cost lives. There have even been incidents of Chinese employers killing African workers.
African businesses also complain that the Chinese government’s strong financial support of Chinese businesses has made it extremely hard for local firms to compete. Some accidents have also been reported as a result of poor quality construction of Chinese built roads and hospitals. The list goes on and on.
Despite such a terrible record, Chinese firms have been growing in Africa, because they have bribed local officials and inspectors to escape punishment. Their products, from food to bridges and roads, are often unsafe, but these firms often bribe officials or judges to avoid punishment in cases of complaints by consumers or environmentalists.
Few Chinese would doubt the credibility of the above, because Chinese businesses practice the same way in China. Business is conducted through collusion with the government and by bribing officials to obtain business opportunities and political protection.
They stop at nothing, damage the environment, generate false GDP numbers, run their work places with poor safety measures, disregard workers’ safety, and exploit workers as production tools. Here too, their products, from food to bridges and roads, are often unsafe, but by bribing officials or judges they avoid punishment.
The China model, marked by corruption, resource exploitation, and disregard of the environment and people’s wellbeing, has been spread to the world through overseas investments.
Ecuador is about to taste the bitterness as its government is planning to sell one-third of its Amazon jungle to a Chinese petroleum company. Seven local tribes there are fighting against the plan. I wished that the Ecuadorian people would learn from Africa’s lessons and keep Chinese firms out. That is the only way to save their homeland.
After being implemented in China for almost 30 years, the China model yielded a bloody and toxic GDP through abuse of the environment and Chinese people’s future, and has made China the world’s biggest billionaire cradle as well as the most polluted country with high cancer rates.
Zhu Houze, Chinas’s propaganda chief from 1985 to 1987, warned on his death-bed that the China model should not be spread overseas. “This model has harmed over a billion Chinese. We can’t go on to harm other countries,” he said.
China is now heavily reliant on foreign resources. It has to give up its current China model, which the world finds invidious, in order to obtain resources. Otherwise, one day the civilized world will unite against and boycott China. By then, China will turn from “orphan of Asia” to “orphan of the world.”
He Qinglian is a prominent Chinese author and economist. Currently based in the U.S., she authored “China’s Pitfalls,” which concerns corruption in China’s economic reform of the 1990s, and “The Fog of Censorship: Media Control in China,” which addresses the manipulation and restriction of the press. She regularly writes on contemporary Chinese social and economic issues.
First published in Human Rights in China Biweekly.