Shortly before Xi’s visit to Nigeria, Lamido Sanusi, the country’s central bank governor, criticized China on the U.K.’s Financial Times for taking Africa’s primary goods and selling manufactured ones back to Africa, saying China is in Africa not for African interests but its own.
“This was the essence of colonialism,” Sanusi said, adding, “It is a significant contributor to Africa’s de-industrialisation and underdevelopment.”
South African president Jacob Zuma warned in 2012 that the trade pattern between Africa and China is “unsustainable in the long term.”
But such complaints from African governments are rare as benefits to state leaders are often tied to Chinese companies in various ways. Most objections come from grassroots groups.
Anti-corruption organization Transparency International surveyed 3,016 senior business executives from 30 countries on their perceptions of businesses from 28 countries that they had business relationships with.
Based on their ratings on how likely businesses from each country would pay bribes abroad, a Bribe Payers Index (BPI) was calculated for each country to reflect its perceived corruption level. China received the second lowest BPI, indicating the second highest corruption likelihood, after Russia.
The BPI covered 19 sectors, and included countries and regions from all key areas in the world. The 2011 BPI report also suggested that government-controlled high dollar volume industries, including infrastructure, construction, and petroleum and natural gas, are most susceptible to corruption abroad.
The Chinese government has refuted the BPI report, but reality proves that bribery and corruption has been the engine of China’s overseas business expansion.
Between 2008 and 2012, the World Bank’s Sanctions Board put 14 Chinese firms and individuals on its “debarred and cross-debarred list” for fraud and corruption. These firms and individuals were determined to be ineligible to be awarded a World Bank financed contract for two to eight years.
In 2009, the state-run Chinese mining firm Metallurgical Group Corp was accused of bribing the Afghan minister of Mines with $30 million to win the contract of the country’s largest development project.
On March 19, 2013, senior executives of Chinese telecom giant ZTE’s Mongolian branch were investigated on bribery charges. ZTE products and services have been deployed in more than 140 countries. In February, ZTE was accused of bribing officials in Kenya to win a government contract there.
In Algeria, ZTE executives were sentenced to 10 years in prison after being convicted of corruption in June 2012.
The majority of Chinese investment in Africa is in public infrastructure projects, mining and construction, and in almost every case the Chinese firms cleared the path with bribes. But why have only a few been publicized?
Kong Xiangren, an official of the Chinese Ministry of Supervision, explained in 2010. “Many [bribery] cases caught our attention and were investigated after they were discovered by local governments in the Unites States or Europe, especially those involving international business corruption,” Kong said. “This is because the bribing activities were well hidden.”